# A sample program for parallelized selected basis diagonalization

Sample code for computing the ground state of a quantum chemistry Hamiltonian based on sampled bitstrings representing alpha-spin orbitals.

This code assumes that alpha-spin and beta-spin orbitals share the same spatial basis. The Hilbert space is defined as the tensor product
of the alpha and beta spin sectors. The quantum chemistry Hamiltonian should be provided as a text file in FCIDUMP format.

- The alpha-spin orbital configuration is expected to be provided as a plain text file, with one bitstring per line (see AlphaDets.txt).
Each bitstring is ordered from right to left, meaning the rightmost bit corresponds to orbital 1, the next to orbital 2, and so on.
Note that the orbital labels correspond to the orbital indices defined in the FCIDUMP format described below.

- The FCIDUMP format is a commonly used quantum chemistry format that first lists two-electron integrals
$v_{ijkl} = \int d{\bf r}_1 d{\bf r}_2 \phi_i({\bf r}_1) \phi_k ({\bf r}_2) \vert {\bf r}_1 - {\bf r}_2 \vert^{-1} \phi_l ({\bf r}_2) \phi_j ({\bf r}_1)$
followed by one-electron integrals
$h_{ij} = \int d {\bf r} \phi_i ({\bf r}) \hat{h} \phi_j({\bf r})$.
[P. J. Knowles, N.C. Handy, Computer Physics Communications, {\bf 54}(1), 75-83 (1989)](https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-4655(89)90033-7)
For an example, see the `fcidump_Fe4S4.txt` file in the directory, which corresponds to an iron ion cluster.

- The ground state is computed using the Davidson algorithm. The calculation starts from an initial state in which all the weight is
placed on the product state corresponding to the first bitstring (after sorting) in `AlphaDets.txt`. In other words, the FCIDUMP file
is asssumed to define the basis in terms of molecular orbitals, and the initial state described above is regarded as the Hartree-Fock solution.

- For more details about the bitstring format used in `AlphaDets.txt` and the FCIDUMP file, please refer to the *User Guide* page generated by Doxygen.
You can generate the documentation by running the command `doxygen ./doc/Doxyfile` from the top level directory of this package.


## Requirement

- c++17
- OpenMP
- MPI
- BLAS and LAPACK

## Build

- Open the `Configuration` file and edit the environment variables according to your system: the compiler command (CCCOM), compiler options (CCFLAGS), and linker options (SYSLIB), and the path to the sbd library (SBD_PATH).

- After editing the configuration, run the make command to generate the executable:
    ```
    make
    ```

## Command-Line Arguments for Executable

For usage examples, please refer to the `run.sh` script included in this directory. It shows how to run the executable with various command-line options.

Below is an explanation of each command-line option.

- `--fcidump <str>`:  
  The name of the FCIDUMP file that defines the Hamiltonian integrals.
- `--adetfile <str>`:  
  File containing the set of determinants (bitstrings) for alpha-spin orbitals.
- `--bdetfile <str>`(optional):  
  File containing the set of determinants (bitstrings) for beta-spin orbitals.
  If this option is not specified, the beta-spin determinant set is taken to be identical to that provided via `--adetfile`.
- `--loadname <str>`:  
  The name of the file containing the wavefunction data to load. If not specified, no loading is performed and the Hartree–Fock (HF) solution is used as the initial state.
- `--savename <str>`:  
  The name of the file in which to save the resulting wavefunction data. If not specified, the wavefunction is not saved.
- `--task_comm_size <int>`:  
  Specifies the size of the task communicator. This controls how the operations on the column indices of the Hamiltonian are distributed during matrix-vector multiplication.
- `--adet_comm_size <int>`:  
  The number of partitions for the set of determinants (bitstrings) corresponding to alpha-spin orbitals.
- `--bdet_comm_size <int>`:  
  The number of partitions for the set of determinants (bitstrings) corresponding to beta-spin orbitals.
- `--method <int>`:  
  - 0: The Davidson algorithm is performed, and the Hamiltonian is not stored explicitly and is applied to the wavefunction on-the-fly.
  - 1: The Davidson algorithm is performed, and the Hamiltonian matrix is stored to accelerate matrix-vector multiplication at the cost of higher memory usage.
  - 2: The Lanczos algorithm is performed, and the Hamiltonian is not stored explicitly and is applied to the wavefunction on-the-fly.
  - 3: The Lanczos algorithm is performed, and the Hamiltonian matrix is stored to accelerate matrix-vector multiplication at the cost of higher memory usage.
- `--iteration <int>`:  
  The number of Davidson restarts to perform.
- `--block <int>`:  
  The maximum size of the subspace used in the Davidson method.
- `--tolerance <float>`:  
  Convergence threshold for the Davidson method. It determines the stopping criterion based on the norm of the residual vector.
- `--carryover_type <int>`:  
  Controls how carryover bitstrings are generated.  
  - `0`: Disable carryover bitstring generation.  
  - `1`: Select dominant half-determinants using marginal probabilities $p(D^{\alpha}) = \sum_{D^{\beta}} \vert c_{D^{\alpha},D^{\beta}} \vert^2$ (and similarly for $\beta$), i.e., the diagonal elements of the reduced density matrix.  
  - `2`: In additon to type 1, include all half-determinants generated by applying single-particle excitations to the selected dominant half-determinants.  
  - `3`: Select determinants based on wave-function amplitudes, extract the corresponding half-determinants, and include all half-determinants generated by applying single-particle excitations to them. This corresponds to the dominant-determinant-based extended subspace construction.
- `--carryover_ratio <float>`:  
  Fraction of bitstrings to retain during the carryover selection step. Bitstrings are ranked by their weights, and only the top  carryover_ratio fraction is kept. This option is used for `--carryover_type 1` and `2`.  
- `--carryover_threshold <float>`:  
  Threshold parameter controlling carryover selection.  
  For `--carryover_type 1` and `2` (used only when `--carryover_ratio is set to 0`), half-determinants are ranked by their weights, and the selection is truncated such that the cumulative weight reaches 1 - carryover_threshold.  
  For `--carryover_type 3`, this value is used as a direct cutoff on determinant weights; determinants with weights smaller than carryover_threshold are
  discarded.
- `--carryover_adetfile <str>`:  
  output file for carryover alpha-determinant bitstrings. When specified, the carryover alpha-determinants generated according to `--carryover_type` are written to the given file in text format.
  If not specified, no alpha-determinant carryover bitstrings are dumped.
- `--carryover_bdetfile <str>`:  
  Output file for carryover beta-determinant bitstrings. When specified, the carryover beta-determinants generated according to `--carryover_type` are written to the given file in text format.  
  If not specified, no beta-determinant carryover bitstrings are dumped.  
- `--shuffle <int>`:  
  Whether to shuffle the order of input half-determinants. If set to 0, no shuffling is performed; otherwise, the input is shuffled.
- `--rdm <int>`:  
  Whether to compute the 1-particle and 2-particle reduced density matrices (1pRDM and 2pRDM). If set to 0, they are not computed; otherwise, they are computed.
- `--bit_length <int>`:  
  Specifies the bit length handled by each size_t when representing bitstrings using `std::vector<size_t>`. The default value is 20.

